Chittagong is the second most populous city and main seaport of Bangladesh. Situated on the Karnaphuli River some 19 km (12 mi) from its mouth at the Bay of Bengal, it straddles hilly terrain and faces the Bay of Bengal. It is the capital of Chittagong Division, the largest administrative division of Bangladesh. Its metropolitan area has a population of 6.5 million.Chittagong is the chief port of Bangladesh and has extensively developed port facilities for ocean steamers., See a, via Google and read more on Chittagong Division and Chittagong Attractions from, >, The city’s many industries, powered by a hydroelectric plant up the river, use the products of the area–jute, cotton, rice, tea, petroleum (from offshore installations), and bamboo. The bamboo is harvested chiefly from the Chittagong Hill tracts, 13,191 sq. km (5,093 sq. mi) of rugged, thickly forested land along the Bay of Bengal that is inhabited by mountain tribes who have opposed recent Bengali settlement in the area. Chittagong’s setting is picturesque: it is surrounded by the bay, the river, and hills that culminate in mountains up to 1,200 m (4,000 ft) high. Rainfall averages 2,870 mm (113 in) annually, and the average annual temperature is 26 degree C (78 degree F)., An ancient city, Chittagong passed from Tippera (Buddhist) dominance to Arakan (Hindu) and then Moghul (Muslim) rule, with periods of reconquest and recontrol. The Portuguese made inroads in the 16th century, and the British gained control in 1760., Chittagong Court Building, : Situated on the Fairy Hill, this building commands a magnificent bird’s eye view of Chittagong city, particularly at night. This gigantic Judge Court building was built immediately after the East India Company conquered and declared Chittagong as a separate administrative area in 1773. The building is huge, over 250 thousand square feet and has hundreds of rooms., i:This holy shrine attracts a large number of visitors and pilgrims. At its base there is a large pond with several hundred tortoises floating in the water. According to tradition, these turtles are descendants of evil spirits (djinn) who were cast into this shape because they incurred the wrath of the great saint who visited the place about 1100 years ago., C, : Situated in the old city, the multi domed mosque is an architectural sight to behold., World War II Cemetery, Foy’s Lake, :In this well-preserved cemetery at quiet and picturesque place lie buried over 700 soldiers from commonwealth countries and Japan., : Set amidst panoramic surroundings, this ideal spot for outings and picnics is thronged by thousands of visitors.This Lake has been created in the natural environment in 1924 by the initiative of the then Asam-Bengal Railway. This lake has been created by building a dam based on a plan by an English nngineer Mr. Foy., : A unique treasure house of variety of tribal culture and heritage of Bangladesh.The Ethnological Museum of Chittagong was established in the first half of nineteen sixties. The museum contains four galleries and a small hall., : Sandy beach at the meeting place of the roaring sea and the river Karnaphuli.